---
layout: page
title: Practice Exam 3
permalink: /exams/practice-exam3
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

Let $$G$$ be a group.

* (a) The field $$\mathbb Z_3$$ is a subfield of $$\mathbb Q$$

* (b) There is a field with exactly four elements

* (c) The element $$\pi^{1/3} + 2$$ is transcendental over $$\mathbb Q(\pi)$$

* (d) The elements $$\sqrt{1-\sqrt{3}}$$ and $$\sqrt{1+\sqrt{3}}$$ are conjugate over $$\mathbb Q$$

* (e) If $$E$$ is a field extension of $$F$$ of finite degree then $$E$$ is an algebraic extension of $$F$$

## Problem 2

* (a) Let $$E$$ be a field extension of $$F$$ and suppose $$\alpha\in E$$ is algebraic over $$F$$.  State the definition of the minimal polynomial of $$\alpha$$ over $$F$$.

* (b) State the Fundamental Theorem for Ring Homomorphisms.

* (c) Give an example of a ring with a prime ideal which is not a maximal ideal.  Justify.

## Problem 3

Consider the field

$$E = \mathbb Q(\sqrt{\sqrt{3}+\sqrt{5}}).$$

* (a) Determine the degree of the extension of $$\mathbb Q$$ by $$E$$

* (b) Show that $$E$$ contains $$\mathbb Q(\sqrt{3})$$ as a subfield

* (c) Determine the degree of the extension of $$\mathbb Q(\sqrt{3})$$ by $$E$$.

## Problem 4

Let $$R=\mathbb Z[x]$$ and let $$I$$ be the ideal of $$R$$ generated by two elements

$$I = \langle 3, x^2 + x + 1\rangle.$$

a) Write down explicitly the distinct elements of $$R/I$$.

b) Show that $$I$$ is not a prime ideal.

c) Find a maximal ideal $$J$$ of $$R$$ with $$I\subseteq J$$.

## Problem 5

Find all of the field automorphisms of $$\mathbb Q(\alpha)$$ for $$\alpha = \sqrt{1-\sqrt{5}}$$

## Problem 6

Prove that if $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ are algebraic numbers, then so is $$\alpha+\beta$$.

## Problem 7

Let $$R$$ be a commutative ring.  Then $$R$$ is called **reduced** if the only nilpotent element is $$0$$.  (Recall  $$r\in R$$ is nilpotent if $$r^n=0$$ for some positive integer $$n$$).

* Given an example of a commutative ring which is not reduced.

An ideal $$I\subseteq R$$ is called **radical** if $$r^n\in I$$ implies $$r\in I$$ for all $$r\in R$$.

* Show that the quotient ring $$R/I$$ is reduced if and only if $$I$$ is a radical ideal of $$R$$.





