---
layout: page
title: Exam 2
permalink: /exams/exam2
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

* (a) If $$H$$ is a subgroup of a group $$G$$ and $$H$$ is abelian, then $$H$$ is normal.

* (b) $$\mathbb Z_n$$ is a free abelian group.

* (c) If $$G$$ has only one Sylow $$p$$-subgroup $$P$$ for some prime number $$p$$, then $$P$$ is normal

* (d) Any group of order $$9$$ is abelian

* (e) If $$H$$ is a normal subgroup of a group $$G$$ and both $$H$$ and $$G/H$$ are abelian, then $$G$$ is abelian

## Problem 2

* (a) State the first isomorphism theorem for groups.

* (b) State Cauchy's Theorem.

* (c) Give an example of a noncommutative group whose center has more than one element.

## Problem 3

Let $$G$$ be the group of $$2\times 2$$ invertible matrices with entries in $$\mathbb Z_3$$, where the group operation is matrix multiplication but where the multiplication and addition of entries is modular.  Note that $$G$$ has $$48$$ elements total.

* (a) What is the size of a Sylow $$2$$-subgroup of $$G$$?  What about the size of a Sylow $$3$$-subgroup?

* (b) How many Sylow $$3$$-subgroups does $$G$$ have?  Carefully justify your answer.

* (c) How many Sylow $$2$$-subgroups does $$G$$ have?  Carefully justify your answer.

## Problem 4

Let $$G = \mathbb Z\times \mathbb Z$$ and let $$H$$ be the subgroup of $$G$$ generated by the elements $$(4,6)$$ and $$(2,10)$$.

* (a) Write down explicitly the distinct cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

* (b) Determine what finite abelian group $$G/H$$ is isomorphic to in invariant factor form.

## Problem 5

Suppose that $$G$$ is a cyclic group and that $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$.
Prove that the quotient group $$G/H$$ is also cyclic.

## Problem 6

Let $$R$$ be a ring.  Show that the set

$$R^\times = \{u\in R: u\text{ is a unit}\}$$

is a group.

## Problem 7

Let $$p$$ be a prime number.

a) Prove the Freshman's Dream

$$(a + b)^p = a^p + b^p,\quad \text{for all $a,b\in \mathbb Z_p$}.$$

b) Show that the **Frobenius map** $$F_p(x) = x^p$$ is a ring homomorphism $$\mathbb Z_p\rightarrow\mathbb Z_p$$.


