---
layout: page
title: Practice Final
permalink: /exams/practice-final
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

Let $$F$$ be a field, $$E$$ an extension field of $$F$$ and $$G = G(E/F)$$.

* (a) $$F$$ is the fixed subfield of $$G$$, ie. $$F = \{a\in E: \sigma(a) = a\ \forall a\in G\}$$

* (b) If $$f(x)\in F[x]$$ and $$a\in E$$ is a root of $$f(x)$$, then $$\sigma(a)$$ is also a root of $$f(x)$$

* (c) If $$E/F$$ is a Galois extension, then $$\lvert G\rvert = [E:F]$$

* (d) If $$f(x)\in F(x)$$ is irreducible, then all of the roots of $$f(x)$$ must be different

* (e) If $$E/F$$ is a Galois extension, then the number of subgroups of $$G$$ is equal to the number of field extensions of $$F$$ contained in $$E$$

## Problem 2

* (a) State what it means for a field extension to be normal.  Give an explicit example of a field extension which is normal, and one which is not normal.

* (b) State the First Isomorphism Theorem for rings.

* (c) Write down the defifnition of an ideal $$I$$ of a commutative ring $$R$$.

* (d) Give an example of a field extension $$E$$ of a field $$F$$ whose Galois group is $$\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2$$.

## Problem 3

Determine explicitly the Galois group $$G$$ of $$E = \mathbb Q[\sqrt[4]{2},i]$$ over $$F=\mathbb Q$$.
Be sure to carefully explain your reasoning.
Determine which well-known finite group $$E$$ is isomorphic to.

## Problem 4

Let $$R = \mathbb{Z}[x]$$ be the ring of polynomials with integer coefficients and let $$I$$ be the ideal of $$R$$ generated by $$5$$ and $$x^2+2x+1$$.
Describe explicitly the cosets of $$R/I$$.  How many are there?


## Problem 5

* (a) State Lagrange's theorem
* (b) Suppose that $$G$$ is a non-cyclic group of order $$27$$.  Prove that $$g^9=e$$ for all $$g\in G$$
* (c) Determine, up to isomorphism, all the finite abelian groups of order $$72$$


## Problem 6

Let

$$G = \{(a,b)\in \mathbb Q\times\mathbb Q: a\neq 0\}.$$

Show that the binary relation

$$(a,b)*(c,d) = (ac,ad + bc))$$

is well-defined and makes $$G$$ into a group.

## Problem 7

Let $$F$$ be a finite field of order $$m+1$$ and consider the set

$$F^\times = \{a\in F: a\neq 0\}.$$

* (a) Show that $$F^\times$$ is a group under multiplication.
* (b) Show that every element of $$F^\times$$ is a root of the polynomial $$x^m-1$$.
* (c) Show that $$F^\times$$ is isomorphic to $$\mathbb Z_m$$



