---
layout: page
title: Practice Final Solutions
permalink: /exams/practice-final-soln
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)

Let $$F$$ be a field, $$E$$ an extension field of $$F$$ and $$G = G(E/F)$$.

* (a) $$F$$ is the fixed subfield of $$G$$, ie. $$F = \{a\in E: \sigma(a) = a\ \forall a\in G\}$$

FALSE!  Consider $$E = \mathbb Q[\sqrt[3]{2}]$$ and $$F = \mathbb Q$$ where $$G(E/F) = \{\text{id}_E \}$$

* (b) If $$f(x)\in F[x]$$ and $$a\in E$$ is a root of $$f(x)$$, then $$\sigma(a)$$ is also a root of $$f(x)$$

TRUE!  We proved this in class.  Do you remember how?

* (c) If $$E/F$$ is a Galois extension, then $$\lvert G\rvert = [E:F]$$

TRUE!  That's part of the statement of the Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory

* (d) If $$f(x)\in F(x)$$ is irreducible, then all of the roots of $$f(x)$$ must be different

FALSE!  Think about $$E = \mathbb F_p(t)$$ and $$f(x) = x^p-t$$.  We showed that $$f(x)$$ is irreducible but all its roots are the same.

* (e) If $$E/F$$ is a Galois extension, then the number of subgroups of $$G$$ is equal to the number of field extensions of $$F$$ contained in $$E$$

TRUE!  That's a consequence of the Fundamental Theorem of Galois Theory

## Problem 2

* (a) State what it means for a field extension to be normal.  Give an explicit example of a field extension which is normal, and one which is not normal.

A field extension $$F\subseteq E$$ is normal if every polynomial $$f(x)\in F[x]$$ which has a root in $$E$$ must split in $$E$$.

* (b) State the First Isomorphism Theorem for rings.

Let $$f: R\rightarrow S$$ be a ring homomorphism.  Then $$f$$ induces an isomorphism

$$R/\ker(f)\rightarrow\text{img}(f),\quad r + \ker(f) \mapsto f(r).$$

* (c) Write down the defifnition of an ideal $$I$$ of a commutative ring $$R$$.

An ideal $$I$$ of $$R$$ is a subset of $$R$$ satisfying the properties that $$a+b\in I$$ for all $$a,b\in I$$ and $$ca\in I$$ for all $$a\in I$$ and $$c\in R$$.

* (d) Give an example of a field extension $$E$$ of a field $$F$$ whose Galois group is $$\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2$$.

Example from class: $$\mathbb Q[\sqrt{2},\sqrt{3}]$$

## Problem 3

Determine explicitly the Galois group $$G$$ of $$E = \mathbb Q[\sqrt[4]{2},i]$$ over $$F=\mathbb Q$$.
Be sure to carefully explain your reasoning.
Determine which well-known finite group $$E$$ is isomorphic to.

If $$\sigma: E\rightarrow E$$ is a field automorphism, then it is determined by where it sends $$\sqrt[4]{2}$$ and $$i$$.
Let $$a=\sigma(i)$$ and $$b =\sigma(\sqrt[4]{2})$$.
Note that since

$$-1 = \sigma(-1) = \sigma(i^2) = (\sigma(i))^2 = a^2$$

$$2 = \sigma(2) = \sigma((\sqrt[4]{2})^4) = (\sigma(\sqrt[4]{2}))^4 = b^4$$

We must have that $$a = \pm\sqrt{-1} = \pm i$$ and $$b^4=2$$, meaning $$b = \pm \sqrt[4]{2}$$ or $$b = \pm i\sqrt[4]{2}$$.
Thus there are $$8$$ total possible combinations for where $$a$$ and $$b$$ could be sent.
Hence $$G$$ is a group of order $$8$$.

Now consider the four points $$\pm \sqrt[4]{2},\pm i\sqrt[4]{2}$$ in the complex plane.
Note that they form the vertices of a square centered at the origin and rotated by $$45$$ degrees.
Each element of $$G$$ permutes these four points, which in turn describes an automorphism of the square.
Thus we have a group homomorphism from $$G$$ into the automorphism group of the square $$D_4$$, a dihedral group!
Since each automorphism is determined by where it sends $$\pm \sqrt[4]{2}$$ and $$\pm i\sqrt[4]{2}$$, this homomorphism is injective.  Since each set has $$8$$ elements it must be bijective, hence is an isomorphism.

## Problem 4

Let $$R = \mathbb{Z}[x]$$ be the ring of polynomials with integer coefficients and let $$I$$ be the ideal of $$R$$ generated by $$5$$ and $$x^2+2x+1$$.
Describe explicitly the cosets of $$R/I$$.  How many are there?

Given a polynomial $$f(x)\in\mathbb{Z}[x]$$ we can use Euclidean division to write

$$f(x) = g(x)(x^2+2x+1) + h(x)$$

for some polynomials $$g(x)$$ and $$h(x)$$ with $$\deg(h(x))<2$$.  Consequently $$f(x) + I = h(x) + I$$ and we conclude

$$R/I = \{ax + b + I: a,b\in\mathbb Z\}.$$

Now since $$5\in I$$, we can reduce both $$a$$ and $$b$$ modulo $$5$$, so that explicitly the cosets are

$$R/I = \{ax + b + I: 0\leq a,b\leq 4\}.$$

in particular there are $$25$$ cosets.


Just as an aside, the product in this quotient ring is

$$(ax + b + I)(cx + d + I) = ac x^2 + (ad + bc)x + bd + I = (ad + bc - 2ac)x + bd-ac + I.$$


## Problem 5

* (a) State Lagrange's theorem
* (b) Suppose that $$G$$ is a non-cyclic group of order $$27$$.  Prove that $$g^9=e$$ for all $$g\in G$$
* (c) Determine, up to isomorphism, all the finite abelian groups of order $$72$$

Lagrange's Theorem says that if $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$ then the order of $$G$$ is equal to the order of $$H$$ times the number of cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

Let $$g\in G$$.  Since $$G$$ is not cyclic, we know that $$\langle g\rangle$$ is a *proper* subgroup of $$G$$.
By Lagrange's theorem, this means the order of $$g$$ is $$1$$, $$3$$, or $$9$$.  In any case $$g^9 = e$$.

The factors of $$72$$ are $$2,2,2,3,3$$.  Therefore up to isomorphism, the groups are

$$
\mathbb Z_8\times\mathbb Z_9,
\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_4\times\mathbb Z_9,
\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_9,
$$

$$
\mathbb Z_8\times\mathbb Z_3\times \mathbb Z_3,
\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_4\times\mathbb Z_3\times \mathbb Z_3,
\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_2\times\mathbb Z_3\times \mathbb Z_3,
$$


## Problem 6

Let

$$G = \{(a,b)\in \mathbb Q\times\mathbb Q: a\neq 0\}.$$

Show that the binary relation

$$(a,b)*(c,d) = (ac,ad + bc))$$

is well-defined and makes $$G$$ into a group.

First of all if $$a,c\neq 0$$ then $$ac\neq 0$$ so $$*$$ produces a well-defined map from $$G\times G$$ to $$G$$.
Now to show that $$G$$ is a group, we need to show that $$*$$ is associative, has an identity, and has inverses.

Note that

$$(a,b)*((c,d)*(e,f)) = (a,b)*(ce,cf+de) = (ace,acf+ade+bde)$$

$$((a,b)*(c,d))*(e,f) = (ac,ad+bc)*(e,f) = (ace,acf + ade + bce)$$

This shows that $$*$$ is associative.  The identity element is $$(1,0)$$ since

$$(a,b)*(1,0) = (a,a*0 + b*1) = (a,b),\quad (1,0)*(a,b) = (a, 1*b + 0*a) = (a,b).$$

Finally, since

$$(a,b)*(a^{-1}, -a^{-2}b) = (1,0)$$

we see that $$(a,b)$$ has inverse $$(a^{-1},-a^{-2}b)$$ so that $$G$$ is a group.


An alternative, clever proof of the fact that $$G$$ is a group is to realize that

$$\psi: G\mapsto \text{GL}_2(\mathbb Q),\quad (a,b)\mapsto \left(\begin{array}{cc}
a & b\\ 0 & a
\end{array}\right)$$

is an injective homomorphism of sets with binary operators.  The image of $$\psi$$ is a subgroup of $$\text{GL}_2(\mathbb Q)$$, so it follows that $$G$$ is isomorphic to a group and therefore itself a group.



## Problem 7

Let $$F$$ be a finite field of order $$m+1$$ and consider the set

$$F^\times = \{a\in F: a\neq 0\}.$$

* (a) Show that $$F^\times$$ is a group under multiplication.
* (b) Show that every element of $$F^\times$$ is a root of the polynomial $$x^m-1$$.
* (c) Show that $$F^\times$$ is isomorphic to $$\mathbb Z_m$$

Multiplication in a ring is associative, so $$F^\times$$ is at least a semigroup.  It has an identity element $$1$$, as well as multiplicative inverses since it is a field.  Therefore it must be a group.

The order of $$F^\times$$ is $$m$$.  By Lagrange's theorem, if $$a\in F^\times$$, then the order $$k$$ of $$a$$ must divide the order of the group.  Thus $$m = jk$$ for some integer $$j>0$$, making $$a^m = a^{jk} = (a^k)^j = 1^j = 1.$$  This proves $$a^m-1 = 0$$ so that $$a$$ is a root of $$x^m-1$$.
Note that sinnce $$x^m-1$$ has at most $$m$$ different roots, it follows $$F^\times = \{a\in \overline{F}: a^m=1\}.$$

Now if $$F^\times$$ is not cyclic, then it contains a copy of $$\mathbb Z_p\times\mathbb Z_p$$ for some prime $$p$$ dividing $$m$$.
In this case, $$G$$ has at least $$p^2$$ **distinct** elements of order $$p$$.
These are roots of the polynomial $$x^p-1$$.  However, this polynomial can have at most $$p$$ roots, so this is a contradiction!
Hence $$F^\times$$ is cyclic.
Thus $$F^\times\cong \mathbb Z_m$$.

