---
layout: page
title: Practice Exam 1
permalink: /exams/practice-exam1
---

Solve each of the following problems.
If the problem asks for a proof, be sure to carefully justify your work, including any theorems from class.

Note: you may NOT use a theorem or result from class to prove something when it makes the problem entirely trivial.  If you are unsure whether a particular theorem or result is allowed, just ask!

## Problem 1 (True or False)
For each of the following, write TRUE if the statement is true and FALSE if the statement is false.  NO explanation is needed.

a) If $$G$$ is cyclic and $$H\leq G$$ then $$H$$ is also cyclic

b) If $$H$$ and $$K$$ are subgroups of a group $$G$$, then the intersection $$H\cap K$$ is also a subgroup of $$G$$

c) If $$G$$ is an abelian group, then $$G$$ is isomorphic to a direct product of cyclic groups

d) If $$H$$ is a subgroup of $$G$$, then the number of left cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$ must divide the order of $$G$$

e) If $$G$$ is a group and $$x^2 = e$$ then $$x$$ is the identity

## Problem 2

a) State the Structure Theorem for Finitely Generated Abelian Groups in invariant factor form.

b) Write the definition of a homomorphism from a group $$G$$ to a group $$H$$.

c) Give an example of a group $$G$$ with a subgroup $$H$$ which is not cyclic.

## Problem 3

Let $$G = \mathbb Z_3\oplus \mathbb Z_6$$ and let $$H$$ be the subgroup of $$G$$ generated by $$(1,1)$$. Determine explicitly all of the left cosets of $$H$$ in $$G$$.

## Problem 4

Let $$G$$ be the kernel of the group homomorphism

$$\varphi: \mathbb Z_4\oplus\mathbb Z_4\rightarrow\mathbb Z_4,\ \ (m,n)\mapsto 2m+2n$$

a) Determine explicitly the elements of $$G$$.

b) Determine what finite abelian group $$G$$ is isomorphic to in prime divisor form.

## Problem 5

Prove that if $$G$$ is a finite group of prime order $$p$$, then $$G$$ is a cyclic group.

## Problem 6

Let $$G$$ and $$G'$$ be groups with identities $$e$$ and $$e'$$, respectively.  Also let $$\varphi: G\rightarrow G'$$ be a group homomorphism.  Prove each of the following statements

a) $$\varphi(e) = e'$$

b) $$\varphi(a^{-1}) = (\varphi(a))^{-1}$$

c) the image of $$\varphi$$

$$\text{img}(\varphi) = \{\varphi(a): a\in G\}$$

is a subgroup of $$G'$$

## Problem 7

A group $$G$$ is called **divisible** if given any $$x\in G$$ andy any integer $$n>0$$ there exists a $$y\in G$$ so that $$y^n=x$$.

a) Show that the group $$\mathbb Q$$ (with binary operation addition) is divisible.

b) Show that if $$G$$ is a nontrivial cyclic group, then $$G$$ cannot be divisible.



